Tool calling (or function calling) is an important feature of a large language model (LLM). It enables an LLM to ask for help from external rule-based systems on tasks that LLM itself is not proficient in, such as numerical calculation and real-time information retrieval. The quality of the generated tool calls can be affected by multiple factors. In this paper, we analyze how the natural language used in a user query can affect the quality of the generated tool calls. We used the Berkeley Function Call Leaderboard (BFCL)\cite{patilberkeley} dataset and translated it into Chinese, Hindi, and Igbo (a low resource African language). We then tested multiple state-of-the-art LLMs in tool calling, including both proprietary and open-source models. We find that most of the models suffer a large performance drop when the user queries are in a foreign language, and this gap cannot be fully closed with trivial patching strategies like pre-translating queries or post-translating function calls. We categorized the errors based on their types and severity to reflect each model's capability in a more comprehensive way, and the result showed that the primary error type is the inconsistency in the phrasing of the parameter values induced by translation, which is hard to avoid by solely improving the LLM's capability, but easier to patch at the tool execution side. As for models' proficiency in foreign languages, some models do exhibit difficulty in comprehending some user queries correctly, but the problem is minor in comparison. We also analyzed specific wordings and cultural differences that caused LLMs to fail, and concluded that the ability to handle cultural difference is crucial for a robust tool-calling system. Finally, we proposed some potential solutions that can mitigate misunderstanding or confusion caused by language and cultural difference, and thus improve the tool calling experience for users who speak a variety of languages.
\end{abstract}

\section{Introduction}
Tool calling is an important feature of a large language model (LLM). It enables an LLM to ask for help from external rule-based systems on tasks that LLM itself is not proficient in, such as numerical calculation and real-time information retrieval. Many researches have focused on how to improve LLM's tool calling quality through methods like supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning (RL)\cite{qian2025toolrlrewardtoollearning}\cite{feng2025retoolreinforcementlearningstrategic}\cite{liu2025toolacewinningpointsllm}. The robustness of tool calling can be affected by multiple factors. Some researchers have focused on analyzing how LLMs' tool calling quality changes when noises and perturbations are added to the user queries\cite{rabinovich-anaby-tavor-2025-robustness}, showing that the tool calling quality can be impacted by semantic noises. However, none of the existing researches focus on how the difference in the natural language in the user queries can affect the tool calling quality, and it is important because many LLM users speak languages other than English and would also like to enjoy the tool calling feature. Therefore, we conducted experiments on the state-of-the-art LLMs in tool calling, including proprientry models like GPT-5, and open-source models like DeepSeek, Llama, Qwen and Granite, on a set of translated Berkeley Function Call Leaderboard (BFCL)\cite{patilberkeley} dataset in Chinese, Hindi and Igbo, as well as the original dataset. Apart from translation, we also conducted experiments where we added different kinds of noises (paraphrase, synonym replacement) to the original and translated dataset, to test whether LLMs are more vulnerable to noises in the context of a foreign language. We recorded the experiment results, analyzed the error composition, and tested whether trivial patching strategies like pre-translating user queries and post-translating the function calls can fully close the performance gap. Finally, we concluded the major causes of the performance gap and propose potential solutions that can mitigate the errors.

\subsection{Contribution}
Most of the existing robustness tests on tool calling LLMs do not take into account language difference as a source of potential interference on LLMs' performance, and this paper answered this exact question. We not only tested the LLMs on widely used natural languages like Chinese and Hindi, but also on a low resource natural language Igbo. The experiment results give us a comprehensive understanding about what factors contribute to the instability of tool calling performance, including each model's capability and style characteristics, amount of available training resource for each natural language, and specific semantic and cultural factors that may cause confusion and misunderstanding. These results help us pinpoint the causes of the performance drop, and use corresponding strategies to build tool calling systems that are more robust in a multilingual and multi-cultural context. 