LLMs are rapidly evolving from conversational chatbots to global agents. Reliable tool execution across diverse linguistic contexts is essential for this transition, yet it remains a critical bottleneck for real-world deployment . To evaluate this capability, we conducted a systematic stress test covering both language-invariant robustness under semantic perturbations and cross-lingual robustness across Chinese, Hindi, and the low-resource language Igbo . The results reveal a critical "behavioral drift" that standard benchmarks overlook. Models frequently fail not due to a lack of reasoning capability, but because of a specific failure mode we identify as "Parameter Language Mismatch" .

Driven by training alignment that prioritizes conversational helpfulness, models erroneously translate technical API parameters into the user's natural language. This leads to immediate execution failures despite correct intent understanding. This phenomenon exposes a significant blind spot in current SFT and RL training recipes. These methods prioritize instruction following but lack the negative constraints necessary for maintaining functional invariants in tool use. To address this, we propose and validate inference-time interventions. We demonstrate that architectural patterns like pre-translation and post-translation serve as essential guardrails that restore robustness without expensive retraining . Ultimately, achieving robust global agency requires correcting these behavioral misalignments through system design rather than relying solely on scaling model size.


\end{abstract}

\section{Introduction}

Tool calling represents the transition of Large Language Models (LLMs) from conversational interfaces to functional agents. This capability enables LLMs to transcend their static knowledge base and interact with external rule-based systems for tasks requiring precision, such as numerical calculation and real-time information retrieval. Consequently, significant research efforts have been dedicated to enhancing tool-calling capabilities through supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning (RL) \cite{qian2025toolrlrewardtoollearning, feng2025retoolreinforcementlearningstrategic, liu2025toolacewinningpointsllm}.

However, as agents move towards global deployment, the robustness of these systems faces new challenges. While recent studies have analyzed how LLMs react to semantic noises and perturbations within English queries \cite{rabinovich-anaby-tavor-2025-robustness}, a critical dimension remains unexplored: the impact of \textit{linguistic context} itself. Current evaluations largely overlook how the natural language used in user queries affects tool-calling fidelity. This blind spot is significant, as a vast proportion of LLM users interact in languages other than English, yet they expect the same level of agentic reliability.

To bridge this gap, we conducted a systematic stress test on state-of-the-art tool-calling models, including proprietary models like GPT-5 and open-source models like DeepSeek, Llama, Qwen, and Granite. We extended the Berkeley Function Call Leaderboard (BFCL) \cite{patilberkeley} into a multilingual benchmark covering Chinese, Hindi, and the low-resource language Igbo. Beyond simple translation, we introduced a matrix of semantic perturbations (paraphrase, synonym replacement) to investigate whether models exhibit a "robustness collapse" when processing noises in a foreign language context. We recorded execution results, analyzed error compositions, and rigorously tested whether inference-time architectural patterns, specifically pre-translating user queries and post-translating function calls, could serve as effective guardrails to close the performance gap.

% \subsection{Contribution}
% This paper bridges the critical gap in understanding tool-calling robustness across linguistic boundaries, moving beyond the monolingual focus of existing benchmarks. We present the first comprehensive evaluation of tool-calling performance across diverse linguistic typologies, spanning high-resource languages like Chinese and Hindi to the low-resource language Igbo. Crucially, our analysis transcends simple accuracy metrics to diagnose the root causes of performance instability. We identify a specific behavioral failure mode termed \textit{Parameter Language Mismatch} and demonstrate that execution failures are often driven by cultural factors and "over-alignment" rather than a fundamental lack of reasoning capability. Consequently, we reframe the performance gap not merely as a model training deficiency, but as a system design challenge. We propose and validate inference-time architectural strategies that act as effective guardrails, mitigating language-induced confusion and offering a scalable blueprint for building robust, multilingual agentic systems.
